Raymond Bonnar former New York Times
reporter and author of weakness and
deceit but US policy in El Salvador this
morning's New York Times has a an
editorial titled mr. Jackson's prisoner
dealing in which they say the following
paragraph these prisoner deals
demonstrate no diplomatic skill on mr.
Jackson's part on the contrary they
confirm his lack of it how much skill
does it take after all to flatter the
interests and views of another
government against those of your own and
the stack age a favor from a dictator do
you agree with the New York Times that's
I rather had Tyrell this morning and it
was a bit struck by it I think that's a
little bit harsh it seems to me that one
of the things Jackson is showing is that
it might be possible to deal with some
of these people that the United States
is you know for a long time prefers not
to even talk to it seems to me at least
that he's talking I think I think there
are some skills involved I think that
the other parts of the editorial are
more thought-provoking and more
disturbing when they when the editorial
says how much does this interfere with
the normal course of the u.s. relations
but I think by jackson doing these
things it may prompt the administration
with whatever administration it's going
to be to see if it can't talk with some
of these other governments or not and I
think by talking to these governments we
advance rather than impede the cause of
peace ray Bonner graduated from Stanford
Law School in 1967 spent three and a
half years the last three and half years
as a correspondent with the New York
Times a lot of it in Central America and
he has a book look something like this
weakness and deceit it's about US policy
and El Salvador and he's nearing the end
of a book tour and he's just left the
New York Times I might just ask you flat
out and early why a lot of reasons a lot
of things I want to do I was a lawyer I
turned journalist five years ago I went
to Bolivia
not sure what I was gonna do when I went
to Bolivia and at a time of a coup and I
see they've had another one now and I
guess I want to pick up on that journey
again in part and maybe write another
book and maybe do a variety of other
things time to launch a third or fourth
career I've lost track I wish one I want
and I go back to this editorial because
it probably will be somewhat discussed
around town today the Reverend Jesse
Jackson's burgeoning traffic and
prisoners from dictatorships is not as
President Reagan suggests a prosecutable
crime but neither is it as mr. Jackson
asserts a moral enterprise it is
political opportunism and reckless
disregard for American diplomacy it is
collaboration with the enemies of
democracy and embarrassments of
government of the government of the
United States that a few individuals
incidentally benefit from this
showmanship does not relieve its
cynicism are you surprised at the times
would say this oh I don't know whether
I'm surprised in I do know there's a
separation of church and state at most
newspapers and so what the editorial
board says is different from what
reporters might think or report I think
Brian I think it's you're right that the
editorial is gonna provoke discussion
it's caused me to think and I guess
that's what editorials are supposed to
do and when I read it this morning I
guess I was a little surprised because
it wasn't the way I had thought about
the his activities and it's gonna cause
me to think and and it's something I
really want to think about and put into
the process as I try to decide I guess
they're going back to what I said
earlier if he can do this that I would
hope that it would would encourage
others within the administration in the
government to try to work with some of
these foreign governments to obtain the
release of foreign prisoners I mean
we're not only talking about Sakharov in
the Soviet Union and in Syria the
American pilot in Syria and the Cubans
but I mean we got Paraguay and Uruguay
and you could go around the world where
there hundreds of political prisoners
take any look at one of Amnesty
International's monthly and annual
reports and you'll see the list of
political prisoners if something can
come out of this positive like someone
within the government can say well maybe
we ought to we ought to try this same
time of the same type of political
opportunism as the New York Times calls
it or diplomacy is mr. Jackson and his
supporters would call
then I think it might be positive papers
are not actually full and here on the
East Coast of stories about Central
America today but there are some
interesting stories about Central and
South America because you spent so much
time down there and written a book about
it see if you can put this into context
for us here's a story on the front page
of the Washington Post ed Cody's story
out of Miami and Isis and an east of
funds low rebels solicit private groups
this is suggesting that because the US
government is not able to fund the anti
sandanista guerrilla forces down in
Nicaragua that they're coming to United
States for funds let me ask you do you
think they'll get the money do you think
they'll get the money eventually from
the US government and do you think it's
good or bad well I think the second
question will they get the money
eventually from the US government I
think the answer is yes and I think the
story within the story in it and I trust
every good reporter or at least some of
them are gonna be out there hustling
around to see who these private groups
are and whether the CIA as it is done in
the past isn't just channeling the money
through through these private groups to
the anti sandanista Contras I think the
other question that that article raises
the one that struck me this morning you
might recall that about four or five
months ago the United States denied a
visa to rebend Zamora and in Guillermo
Engel who are political leaders
Democrats but political leaders of the
Opposition in El Salvador and they
denied visas on the grounds that they'd
been soliciting funds for the guerrillas
of El Salvador it seems to me that now
we have people in the United States
soliciting funds for the anti send and
Eastern rebels that we ought to play
equally and let everybody in the United
States and who wants to solicitor or
whatever their point of view is in the
New York Times back to your old
newspaper poetry calls twenty one dark
years in Cuba by hey-zeus Rangel and
it's a Dateline Miami it's one of the
the gentlemen who was released by Castro
in one breath and Reyes Vargas Gomez
said he would rather forget the
psychological and physical torture he
says he endured in 21 years of
imprisonment in Cuba and talk about his
plans to lead a tranquil life of
teaching and writing at st. Thomas
University here meaning Miami
mmm excuse me what I want to ask you
about is later on the article mr. Vargas
says the interrogation is centered on
questions about his anti-castro
activities and whether he had ties with
the CIA I have never had any connection
with the CIA he said I have never done
any work for them but I do think the
agency is necessary my motivation has
always been my belief in anti-communism
and love of Cuba whenever something goes
wrong in Cuba Castro blames it on the
CIA I think that's where the impression
of me started
you think this gentleman was a CIA age
and how and you know how pervasive is
that down in Cuba in the Central
American area well I don't know if he
was a CIA agent it's difficult to know
on every one of these individuals no
reason if he says he's not to believe
that it wasn't but there certainly it's
pretty pervasive I mean the CIA is
especially in Central America nowis is
going all over the place I mean nobody
knows the full extent of their of their
CIA activities and I remember recently
Salvadoran named six CIA paid CIA
informants in El Salvador and some of
the people on the list was really
stunning to those of us who had covered
El Salvador because we'd been meeting
with these people somewhat on a regular
basis and to find out that they'd been
paid by the CIA is a little bit
frightening so I think it's pretty
pervasive especially today when there
seems to be very little control over
what the CIA is up to if the last six
months are any indication this is your
book weakness and deceit you've
completed it in March I believe of this
year when did you finish writing
actually in March no in January and
when's the last time you went down to
Central America about a year and a half
ago but a lot of what's in this book has
to do with documents that you got
through the Freedom of Information Act
yeah it's it's it's more based on
Washington I mean I used my own
understanding of the region's from
having been down there but the book is
based primarily on documents that I
obtained either under the Freedom of
Information Act or that were were leaked
to me one of the things I noticed in the
introduction you talked about talking
off the record or candidly with State
Department officials behind the scenes
and you said they talk candidly but most
insisted that their names not be used
and the sentence popped out of the page
it was an understandable request they
are still in the government what they
told me ran counter to public accounts
as a way maybe of introducing our
audience to what you think about the
whole situation in Central America do
what we hear from the government and
what we read in the newspapers differ
greatly from what is actually happening
in places like Central America pretty
much so I mean that's really this book
in some ways you could take and divide
this the pages or the screen and say
here's what we were told and here's what
the secret documents the confidential
documents show the book is based on the
documents that I obtained which were the
reports from the embassy in El Salvador
and this goes back to 1979 Carter
Administration from the embassy in El
Salvador to Washington that reporting
was pretty accurate pretty honest fit
the reality pretty closely the
distortions came in in Washington that's
where we weren't being told what the
embassy was telling Washington isn't
what we the people or the Congress was
being told by the State Department or by
other branches of the administration
and tremendous discrepancies I mean on
the land reform the land reform was
never as great as it was touted to be
the human rights situation was much
worse than we were told it was the
brutality of the Salvadoran army was
something much greater than then we've
been told let me tell you one document
I'll never I'll never forget when I got
this one I mean I read it I kept reading
it and I called friends of mine who had
been reporters down there and people who
covered El Salvador I said listen to
this let me do this and it was just one
paragraph and it said the army here
operates with a list system if your name
happens to be on it you can expect to
live for 24 hours young people between
the ages of 16 to 20 are the greatest
victims of the indiscriminate violence
because the army considers all students
to be potential subversive and that kit
was at a time that we were saying we
were supporting this moderate central
government that could control the
military and and throughout it's that
way reports about how the Human Rights
Commission that the Salvadoran
government set up set up a Human Rights
Commission the State Department said
this is proof that they respect human
rights
I got a cable in which the Human Rights
Commission is described by the embassy
as a farce I was the word the embassy
used in the cable and it goes on and on
like that the International Commission
she the International Committee of the
Red Cross in Geneva another secret cable
I got
November 1983 November 1983 was the
fourth time that the Reagan
administration had certified an
improving human rights situation this
cable says it's deteriorating 90% of the
political prisoners are being tortured
for East Coast lines are already lighted
let's go to the phones it's two oh two
six two eight two five two five in the
West it's two oh two seven eight three
two seven two seven if you live in the
mountain or Pacific mm-hmm excuse me
time zones long week you can give us a
call and that's remember our 30-day
policy if you've call us within the last
30 days hold off and let others
participate raibh honor former
corresponding for the New York Times and
author of weakness and deceit US policy
in El Salvador has our guest here's what
the book looks like and I assume you can
buy it in all the bookstores I hope so
the the question I had this when I
reading your book and and thinking about
this morning was you suggest the State
Department officials are not telling it
straight in public and that the Reagan
administration has not been telling it
straight in public nor was Carter that's
face book both why question I'm often
asked I think there are two reasons in
the related Brian the polls show that
two out of three Americans are opposed
to the policy in Central America and I
think we're a very moral country and I
say that positively not not in any
self-righteousness or whatever and I
think the American people simply would
not have supported would not have even
the two out of three it would be eight
out of ten would be opposed nine out of
ten the American people would have been
outraged if theta if they didn't know
and what was going on down there if they
knew the extent of the brutality of the
Salvadoran army an army that we were
spending hundreds of millions of dollars
on I think the American people would
have said no you remember some of those
votes in Congress were very close four
or five votes better back early in the
Carter Administration there were some
committee votes five three if they'd
have had this information it's
interesting I met with a group of
congressmen to discuss the book a couple
of weeks ago some said this they agreed
they said yeah have we had those
documents if we didn't know and what was
going on the votes might have been
different
take that one I'm just excited to you
about the armory army operating with a
list system and young people college
kids being the greatest victim something
how do you think the American people
would have reacted
that similarly Archbishop Rivera Damas
came to the United States in April of
1981 he met with Vice President Bush and
with judge Clark he went back and he
wrote a letter I got the letter and have
set it out in full in the book it is an
incredible letter and if that had come
out in April 1981 it may have changed
the course of of our policy down there
what Archbishop Rivera Damas wrote was
to Vice President Bush he said you know
respectfully but you do not understand
the situation in El Salvador I was
surprised when you discussed the Hunta
as being in the center caught between
between the extremes of the right and
the left he said to some extent that's
true but the reality is that the right
wing of the military controls the
government here down there getting the
truth we're talking to nothing but the
guerrilla and with all Americans turning
back to the right where we can
[Music]
all right sir let's hold it there let me
ask ray Bonner first of all how often in
your - around the country did you get
this stronger reaction occasionally I
mean sometimes I got people saying you
know the United States ought to get out
there why why are we involved there we
ought to get out totally and other times
I got reactions such as this
I think the surprising thing was though
that the most of the calls seemed to
justify what the poll saying that is
that two out of three Americans are
opposed to the policy in Central America
you want to answer the gentleman's well
I made what what can you answer it I
mean he didn't ask any questions he just
wanted to attack my my loyalty to the
country and charge me with being a
liberal and and this that and everything
else I mean the principles on which this
country were founded I think were
freedom of speech and freedom of
religion and and all kinds of other
freedoms freedoms which have been
stamped out by the current government in
El Salvador that we have been supporting
you know this is the depressed don't
shoot the messenger either side from the
right or from the left snot the press's
fault
in fact the press the report most
reporters in El Salvador don't talk to
the guerrillas very often very few of
them spent much time with the guerrillas
and don't have their story Eugene Oregon
good morning most generally when we hear
it discussed in the press what's said is
that they're very patriotic and they're
very very concerned about their state
and that's why they're voting
occasionally I Kris missionaries say the
reason that Salvadorans vote is that not
to vote to be considered
and the holiday vote is in some manner
recorded in that they are very much
afraid not to vote or to Road
incorrectly and oh also I wanted to know
if there was a reason why they weren't
working for near time and make you think
they change their direction thank you
your questions about the elections are
interesting ones it was much more
complicated than it was presented in the
United States I think you're right that
many many Salvadoran peasants think that
if they don't vote they will consider to
be considered subversives however I
think that in order to have a very
factual record you should note that how
they voted was not in fact recorded but
a lot of people simply voted out of fear
in the 1982 election and in the 1984
election fear that if they didn't vote
the army would take actions against them
but the people voted in 1982 which was
the big election because they wanted
they wanted peace but of course they
didn't get it and and we have to realize
is that it wasn't the guerrillas it
wasn't the Marxist that interfered with
the 1982 election it was it was the
United States because it was dobichon
who emerged from that 1982 elections
with enough votes to become the head of
the Constituent Assembly enough folks to
become president in fact of the country
and the United States cept in and said
no way that he could become president I
think there's a do you find in reporting
and you've known a lot of reporters you
give credit to a lot of them in your
book is there a bias we've talked a lot
about this week we had the Rupert
Murdoch Ben Bradley debate on from a do
you find that people feel strongly about
issues as you go about your job well is
there a bias or do they have strong
feelings we've talked so much about the
labels of bias I just wondered are you
were you a journalist and will you
continue to be a journalist because you
feel strongly about issues or because
you believe in journalism has it as a
profession I think most journalists it's
because they believe in journalism as a
profession not because they feel
particularly strong about issues
it's interesting one one reporter an
older fella who was I mean been around
the profession for quite a while was
interviewing me for a story about the
book and afterwards because I've been
charged with being an advocate
journalist and he said something quite
surprising he said you know I think and
I've already defended I said I'm not an
advocate journalist I don't think that
that's an unfair charge and he said well
you know he should be happy with that he
said I think we need more Advocate
journalists he's especially in a
situation in out like in El Salvador
he'd been in El Salvador he said you
know when it when it gets to those
extremes it's hard not to be an advocate
for some kind of telling of the truth in
an ending to the brutality because of
the New York City good morning all the
way down do you by chance know any of
the names of his advisers
[Music]
[Applause]
I don't know who's telling these people
give me a political okay let's let's
stop there and this is not directly on
the subject but I'm sure mr. Bonner has
studied this situation do you have any
response no I believe in the principle
on which the country was founded truth
will win out in the marketplace of ideas
so let's have full and vigorous
discussion radical conservative I don't
care I mean I find a lot of views of a
lot of people hitting the public light
pretty deplorable but somehow I think
they ought to be allowed to express them
let me just take just a moment
and say word about Manhattan and the
cable situation over there we've had so
many calls over the last day about a
situation that's developed I just want
to point out to our viewers in Manhattan
that we have been dropped from channel V
at night and this is as a result we
understand of a new must-carry station
that they have to put on up there and we
will no longer be on at night only on
during the daytime on channel L if you
have a question or a comment I'd suggest
you you best call the Manhattan cable
system or the city of New York they do
have space up there in the city channel
and there have been some discussions
about the possibility of using that from
time to time it looks like that our
coverage of the conventions and all will
not be on there at night and the only
suggestion I have to use that you
contact the cable system because we
can't do anything about it down here for
Ray Bonner let's go to Austin Texas good
morning but I was wondering before the
United States the United States became
involved in El Salvador wasn't the kind
of countries run mostly by a oligarchy
it was won by an alliance of the rich
and the powerful which ments the the
oligarchy in the army yes the the number
14 is kind of the myth that's grown up
but it might be a hundred or it might be
200 it might even be 300 families but it
was an infinitesimally small number and
they ruled in alliance with with the
army basically while they while the rich
got richer the army kept the peasants in
line that's that some of his support
clearly I mean that's the best the basis
for much of if not most of his financial
support but obviously he's got more
support than that because he we've got
what 46% of the vote in the last
election and I can assure you the
oligarchy did not make up 46 percent of
the electorate in El Salvador how was
the war was demarcate anywhere connected
with this oligarchy or was he
always a moderate liberal outsider
whatever you want to call well let's see
Duarte father was a well when Duarte
went to Notre Dame went to Catholic High
School and then he went to Notre Dame in
the United States and then he returned
and went into business with his
father-in-law and was in the
construction business was never really
part of the oligarchy that is the elites
of the elites of El Salvador know okay
Austin Texas thank you for the call
in this morning's Wall Street Journal
there's two it's just interesting and
maybe you can help us and if this it
pops up in two places and I and in the
Wall Street Journal of Washington times
and I wonder if as a journalist you find
from time to time people starting to
sell you ideas and stories I mean can
you feel it can you feel it sure get the
call and you know right away somebody's
telling us yeah sure absolutely
well here's a story in the in the Wall
Street Journal it's actually a column by
Suzanne Garmin and it's about Jesse
Jackson and she talks about the fact
that she says this week's orgy of orgy
of media attention to the Democratic
presidential candidate Jesse Jackson had
just about wound down when another press
release appeared on the subject Cuban
left behind by Jackson on hunger strike
mr. Jackson carried with him to Cuba a
list of political prisoners whose
release he said he would do everything
possible to secure one man on the list
was Santos Mirabal imprisoned at the age
of 12 by Fidel Castro well mr. Castro
decided to release some prisoners to mr.
Jackson prison authorities put mr.
mirabile on the bus to freedom drove out
through the prison gates and stopped the
bus took him off and sending back as he
left the bus he announced he was going
to undertake the risk of a hunger strike
and said please tell the world about
those of us who have been left behind
there is no record of protest by mr.
Jackson and mr. mayor bowels behalf now
that's Suzanne garments column this
morning and I'm going to switch quickly
over here to the front page of The
Washington Times Cubans rip freedom from
prisoners grasp Stephanie now freedom
seemed just hours away from Santos
Maribel Rodriguez when guards Cuba's
believe it's born yet the prison boniato
prison pulled him and other political
prisoners from their cells during the
early morning hours goes on until same
story thanks
is that is that the kind of story that
is sold by someone out there and if it
is being sold who would it be and why
having together media picked it up oh
well its soul is too strong a word I
suppose I mean it's sure this town is
you know and in New York is the second
one are full of people who get paid and
get paid very handsomely to get certain
stories out and in this town you not
only have a public relations firm but
you have all the various Institute's you
know whether it's there at its
foundation American Enterprise Institute
gar Negi Institute of policy studies
whatever you have all kinds of groups
that are trying to get their messages
and their stories out and what why other
media didn't pick it up it may depend on
who was peddling it or what some foreign
editor thought of the validity of the
story and the importance of it I mean
it's interesting the Washington Times
has it on the front page and the Wall
Street Journal has it as a column which
is a different approach approach to the
story oh yeah but it happens all the
time
Miami Florida good morning you're on the
a miami go ahead please I'd like to tell
him that we in Salvador don't want the
gorillas we want a democratic process
and that's why we went to vote we didn't
what voted for we didn't vote for fear
we wrote it because we wanted to
democratic the government and I think
that the fact that the gorillas are
communist they don't want to come to
elections they are not going to be
elected toner are you from El Salvador
are you from El Salvador did you vote
did you vote in the last election yes
why are you in Miami and you're saying
well let's ask mr. stay on the line
please let's ask mr. Bonner to respond
to her first comment she may have voted
for that reason no question about it
other people voted out of fear other
people voted because they felt they had
to other people voted because they were
afraid the gorillas where were you where
did you vote in the capital did you
travel outside in the countryside at all
during the election day
did you talk wait a minute did you talk
and do you have any relatives who are
peasants
no not multimillionaires I also wanted
to tell you something
you know these people are your next-door
neighbor maybe excited and that's why
the government is sometimes this or you
know they don't know what they are
fighting against people that they may be
holding a job on day and they are doing
the real of fighting at night it's very
difficult when it's City when the
guerillas are fighting in a country not
to hurt anyone even by mistake now I am
worried about people so worried about
the human rights in El Salvador but
don't worry about the human rights in
Nicaragua or in Cuba where thousands of
people have been incarcerated and killed
just because they don't believe in
communist countries who did you vote for
and also let me tell you something let
me tell you let me tell you something
about my country and I'm I I I hear a
lot of journalists going to our country
and making comments and Polly in
television some of these people don't
even speak Spanish I don't know where
they get their translators or they who
they speak to but they sound but I hear
that they have every times they don't
expect the truth on television here they
make a distorted idea what is going on
in the country I think that we are
fighting for for a democratic process
and we should be allowed to return to
have a democratic government before
before this said we will not take over
like they did
stay on the line a minute Carl let mr.
Bonner respond well I'm not sure what to
respond to exactly I think that you
you're you seem to be saying that it's
alright for some of the human rights
abuses because it's hard to distinguish
who's a gorilla and who's not a gorilla
in El Salvador and that probably is true
in many cases but unfortunately as a
result of that you know many many many
innocent people are being killed you
know
you want to talk about the situation in
Nicaraguan you want to talk about
situation in El Salvador I think it's
important to note the differences in the
human rights situation yes there's
prince press censorship in Nicaragua and
it's intolerable and it should be
condemned and yes they fight with the
church and in Nicaragua it's intolerable
and should be condemned but the
situation's not nearly as bad as it is
in El Salvador I mean it's like a
Salvadoran bishop once said to me he
said and I said I don't understand how
they call that government in Nicaragua
communist and he said the call of
government here Christian and democratic
he said Nicaragua they don't shoot
priests and workers do they and this
isn't to defend the Nicaraguan and the
Sandinistas there's a lot of very
troubling signs in that country but it's
still they don't they don't have
political freedom in Nicaragua but in El
Salvador they have death squads they
don't have death squads in Nicaragua you
don't see peasants bodies showing up on
the road so I think it's I think it's
important to keep in perspective exactly
what the situation is in these two
countries especially when our policy is
to overthrow the government of Nicaragua
hundreds of million dollars to support
the government of El Salvador let me ask
you you live in San Salvador what do you
do for a living and you're here on
holiday or you have relatives in thank
you let's go to Los Angeles next Los
Angeles go ahead you're on with Ray
Bonner good morning morning what got me
was the words advocate journalist and
it's a very good phrase
I'm very interested in reading these
newspapers and once in a while you get
the report they remind me of the byline
under the book byline by Hemingway hazel
it's all I'm not talking about a
columnist or AJ living where the guy
will make a report as a reporter with a
boxing match or political thing or
reporting on the press and this is the
type of a reporter that we have you have
there the guests that are to me of great
interest here in Los Angeles getting to
the last caller I'm a Hispanic Chicano
we are coming up with the people who are
coming from Cuba and Central America and
open up the restaurants and a little
circle a friend that they have we come
across them and they do seem to be like
the ladies are not peasant they seem to
be the middle class upper middle class
very right-wing opinion there was an
incident here in East Elm not here I'm
gonna live in East LA but in detail they
were four years there was this painted
picture on the freeway of Che Guevara
and there was some other similar types
in the some of the barrio law rental
housing units and it was and the kids
growing up it didn't even know who you
know where Cuba was Oh che guevara
there's more of a symbol thing and
lately they've been painted over
you know spray paint come over and then
it trades down to the Cubans who live
around this West Lake Park and so forth
and the only reason I'm calling is it's
coming down to that level where we're
butting heads with people who come in
and very opinionated only variable
right-wing were you born here in the
United States you born somewhere else
what's your what's your reaction to Che
Guevara do you think he was a good guy
bad guy but that was one of the
Central America it as a kid growing up
it was always a hang-up but with the
press or whoever was speaking about the
people's south-of-the-border as banana
republics and look at them they can't do
anything for themselves and when finally
some of them do you know pull themselves
by their bootstraps to say that same old
thing well and desperation casual pops
out and you normally move as we've seen
in the old about our revolution that
happened in in Cuba you know John
Garfield and so forth and so on and
finally something happens and we get out
of a negative reaction to cash flow then
history's history he ends up in the arms
of the Russians where he could have been
and now I he could have been the symbol
for Central America supported by the
United States as the democracy emerging
intact from one extreme to the other
thanks I think he brings up a point I
don't know what he was for sure getting
ahead he suggested I think that the
peasants that's what he called them some
of those may be lower-income people
coming across the border from Central
America are more of a right-wing nature
today than they used to be is that your
experience I don't know if the peasants
are I think the peasants who are coming
across probably have no political
ideology I mean they're just fleeing
from whether it's Haiti or Salvador or
wherever they're just fleeing from the
poverty and from the repression I think
it's what the middle class is the upper
middle class people are fleeing and
they're coming to the United States I
think those are the ones that here he's
saying I have more of the right tendency
to have a right-wing political ideology
I don't know if I necessarily agree with
him but he probably has more contact
with him how important is the whole
issue of Central America do you think in
the minds of most Americans that's very
interesting how important is it I think
it varies I mean let's suppose our
callers have been fairly outspokenness
right no I think I think I think it put
in the Vietnam context which is
sometimes dangerous but I think in this
case it's valid
there I think there's a more of an
interest in an awareness of what's
happening in Central America at this
level of US involvement that there was
in Vietnam it that the counterpart level
of US military involvement and I think
you know you know the administration
uses the line that San Salvador is
closer to Washington DC than Los Angeles
is to Washington DC and therefore we
should be interested in involved I think
that's true a lot of people realize it
is close and that we we should know
about it we should know what's happening
but I'm also stunned by the number of
people who say and it's not not I'm not
saying unanimous or majority but the
number who say we should just get out of
there and leave those people alone it
was interesting the caller before the
wound from Miami said something very
telling she says it's brothers against
brothers well if that's the case then
why are we involved down there weakness
and deceit is the name of the book it's
published by the New York Times Book
Organization it's US policy and El
Salvador and our guest is Raymond Bonnar
back to the Louisville Kentucky good
morning well I think your point that the
causes of the problems in El Salvador
and Central America Guatemala and our
previously in Nicaragua you're right
it's not communism it's not Cuba it's
not the Soviet Union it's not Nicaragua
the Contras the causes of the the
insurrections the revolutions are
decades generations of
bitter poverty and extreme repression
remember ambassador Robert white used to
say when he was the ambassador there
he'd say we'd have a revolution here
even if it weren't for Cuban Nicaragua
and it's really true those are the
causes not not not communism what do you
hope your book will do or has it done
anything so far oh I suppose
presumptuous to hope it'll have any
impact but I mean I one of the one of
the reviews recently the reviews that I
pleased to say have been very good
except for one or two and one of the
criticisms was that I don't offer any
policy solutions and I also it was the
worst in post but I didn't intend to I
intended I mean I hope this will give
the people the facts more of the facts
at least than they've been given in the
past for the last five years again to
two administrations will help them
understand what's happening down there
we'll see what the secret documents say
which the government to two
administrations have not been telling
the American people and let the American
people decide what the policy ought to
be and ask some very good questions I
would hope but during the upcoming
campaign for Ray Bonner we go to
Albuquerque Albuquerque you're much
closer to the border than we are is
there anything in the morning paper
anything in the journal I did want to
ask you your guest how he would expect
anybody to know what was going on in
nicaragua nicaraguan they don't have any
free press there well but but there's
plenty of free international press de
nicaragua they haven't Damond done any
censoring of the International oppressed
at least not to my knowledge I haven't
seen it reported I think the New York
Times has a reporter there The
Washington Post has a reporter there
news magazines television networks I
think the world is very well informed
about what's happening in Nicaragua have
you ever been to Nicaragua which are I
guess to re-educate the people and do
correct thought I I'm not sure what you
re-education camps I haven't I haven't
seen anything about those apologize to
our caller in Albuquerque we lost him
Nicaragua is it heavy been here oh yes
what's the what is the your personal
feeling when you land in San Salvador
versus when you land over in Managua
well I can tell you it's a personal
feeling of probably every reporter down
there and that is that it's a lot safer
in Nicaragua than it is in El Salvador I
mean I think the way the US ambassador
to Nicaragua pointed out once six seven
months ago that he drives around in a
regular car you know it doesn't it's not
a reinforced the armor-plated with all
kinds of bodyguards and the embassy in
Managua the embassy in Nicaragua the US
Embassy isn't surrounded by high walls
like in El Salvador it's a fortress I
mean I think the beYOU know as I
mentioned earlier there's some some real
problems in Nicaragua but it's still not
the situation like it is in El Salvador
in the morning he's reporting on their
services very controversial I just
recalled two years ago when he mentioned
a supposedly tortured guy that he got
who stole from the guerrillas in Mexico
I wasn't completely mistaken the news
time has to apologize because the story
that he got from that guy who was a liar
he reported as a fact in his book I just
read his book I just full of I read with
dots is full of the stars of Miss fads
only only Salvador Sandra right
for example England dudas to report
general Alberta being the minister the
family in fact he was not and I can go
our own own you important in now reform
in a service I know that the Embassy of
the sovereign is full of letters to the
editor to the new house reporting that
you systematically had reported as a
mistress had miss recorded this part on
a service you have supported only one
family story and as you know very well
mr. one that you have been point out by
the professional media watcher the
typical advertised journalist in America
so let me ask you a question before mr.
bono responds where are you from
originally
are you here with the government yeah
you work at the Embassy
mr. Bonner well stay on the line please
did the embassy show you those letters
oh yeah
yo you wrote the letters the thing
speaks for itself
but do you let me ask you caller if
you're working for the Embassy of El
Salvador here and you see a book like
this and you see it discussed around the
United States do you then try to get
people around the country to respond to
it people that are more on your side so
we have a tremendous difficulty transit
to the liberal media
let's go back to the example I point out
tell me the moment we've thought about
this guide is supposedly tortured either
he relaxed his story from Mexico he was
a mistake the guy was a liar Remington
bourbon is a key that is told from the
FDR in Mexico City let's find out what
mr. banner says I didn't get it from the
FDR in Mexico City as you read the book
and as you know I have admitted I should
not have written that story it very few
journalists will make such an admission
I admitted it was a mistake I don't know
what else you want me to do in that
review and the New York Times which was
fairly favorable they also spent several
paragraphs could I use the expression
working you over talking about the
volume is marred by repeated errors of
fact often minor but still disturbing
since that what did you want to respond
to that actually its incidence in the
Washington Post it's the it's and the
only review that I have felt that I had
to respond to because his review is
filled by errors of fact he talks about
something happening in January which
happened in February he he talks about
the Carter Administration in December of
1982 so it's either the Reagan
administration in 82 or the Carter
Administration in 80 he says things that
I didn't say this gentleman is Richard
mullet who is a professor of Latin
American history at Southern Illinois
University and author of guardians of
the dynasty have you read his book no
that's in 1976 books about Nicaragua I
haven't I mean I've read parts of it and
I've seen I haven't read the whole book
in a long time but the other thing is
that he doesn't say there he also taught
at the work for the Pentagon teaching at
the United States War College in Air
Force War College in Alabama
which he doesn't point out why would the
post find mr. Mellott to review your
book because you were the New York Times
and they do that as opposed to what if
there were if you were with Wayne if
they if it was a Washington Post
reporter would they be more favorable or
oh no I don't I don't I'm not saying
suggesting at all and I want to make
very clear I'm not suggesting Washington
Post in any way I think they gave it to
mr. Mallette because they thought he was
knew something about Central America
which in fact that he which in fact he
does and that's the way the review came
out but those are those are the views of
mr. Mellott not the views the Washington
Post book were allow don't ascribe any
political motivation to the post at all
next week starting at about 8:30 a.m.
East Coast time we begin our coverage of
the 1984 Democratic National Convention
in San Francisco actually the convention
had to start for a week but we'll be out
there starting off on Monday cameras
will be in the kgo radio studios
watching the all news radio station take
us through drive time while regular
guests that nine o'clock but we'll keep
going back and forth so you can get a
feeling of what the atmosphere is in San
Francisco our Colin shows start next
week and they'll be all week long we'll
be bringing an update on when they're
scheduled as the weekend goes on that's
next week starting Monday morning we
hope you'll join us for our special
coverage which will be unique of the
1984 Democratic convention in San
Francisco Atlanta good morning by the
way you handle your callers thank you
my questions for your guests are a
couple first is that it's my perception
that the administration has pretty much
decided to let general Gorman and Panama
have essentially a free hand to do
pretty much what he wants to do so is
not to get in a situation like Vietnam
where the military complained about
being second-guessed from Washington all
the time and I was wondering if you
could you know either keep comment on
that verified or not and my other clip
hello other question
was to tell if you knew anything more
about General Gorman where that I find
out more when we see stuff and you know
is he liked them
MacArthur in Korea or no Westmoreland in
Vietnam what sort of a you know I
headquarters is that down there in
Panama Thank You Atlanta good call and
would you tell us as much as you can
about the general the perception that
you have certainly not one I can dispel
nor can I can I confirm it as far as
Gorman see I haven't been to Panama or
the southern commander of that region
since general Gorman replaced general
Wallace Nutting but there was a very
good article in The Wall Street Journal
the left-hand column I think it was last
week but certainly within the last
couple weeks and Loren Jenkins had a
good article in The Washington Post
about general Gorman I would I believe
it was about six months ago but yes he's
definitely somebody I think it's worth
watching who is he
he's the head he's the head of what's
called the u.s. Southern Command based
in Panama which means he's the top
general for all of Latin America he runs
all of Latin America and he used to be a
three-star position it's now a four-star
position got a lot of publicity got a
lot of publicity he's many people think
he's as this caller does that he has a
lot to say about the policy in Central
America at this time especially in
Honduras and the military buildup there
can't let the show go by without showing
this photograph on the front page of USA
Today as they get ready for a weekend
they always give us some special things
over the weekend to look at this is the
Miss USA contestant from Alamogordo New
Mexico is these are parents right here
and I think anything else needs to be
said let's go on to Austin Texas for a
Ray Bonner go ahead please good morning
Austin
I just listening to your guest and he
reminds me about 99% of these
zone a boys they go in and get just a
little bit information and read it read
around real good it isn't I'm trying not
to get very angry because it's what you
call intellectual ignorance
there's no in-depth writing today and
he's gone in and got know how to stuff
he hasn't really gone into the heart of
the thing where the people are involved
he's facing whatever is handed to him
that he runs and printed we are the same
thing United States it is any different
the black situation for example we had
some excellent black people in this
country that are never really brought
out and given the benefit they should
have and the recognition they should
have we get this business of Jackson and
this Farrakhan and all this stuff and if
the writer would really think about it
we had race riots in Detroit in World
War one
we had race riots in Detroit World War
two and it world war what would have
been the equivalent of World War three
the time wise we had riots again now
this is not the black people rioting
during world war one world war two and
then present time okay thanks we're
gonna have to let you go because we are
running out of time and he suggesting
that a lot of what's going on I suspect
his communist-inspired
I don't know whether the inference was
went over to you i we won't go that far
but your reaction to when he says
suggested you just take everything it's
printed and put it down on paper well
everything's given to him I think
anybody who reads the books you'll see
that's not true I mean it's not it's a
volume overwhelming amount of
information I mean these are these are
government documents these are my
documents is that the backbone of this
book
I think so yeah I think there's two hey
if I can to backbones part of its like I
have stone taht it's all in the public
record fascinating I read every
congressional hearing on El Salvador and
Central Americans credible the stuff
that was in those hearings including
assurances that the advisors would only
be there one year and would only train
one battalion and they didn't want more
than 25 million dollars the Reagan
administration said this in April of 81
so it's the public record and then it's
supplemented or added to or compared
with all of the secret documents and I
must have filed or two file drawers full
of documents very brief amount of time
left give us a quick thumbnail sketch of
what it's like to run around the country
and talk to the American people on talk
shows and all that stuff
educational it's interesting to see what
the American people are thinking and I
think the calls this morning are
reflective many people who say what are
we doing there we should get out many
people like get many calls from from
people from El Salvador who are in the
United States that woman spoke very very
good English by the way which is very
interesting the woman living in Miami
and people who say look I mean I've
people have called in and said by God do
we have the right to do whatever we want
to do it if the CIA asked to rig
elections and if the CIA has to go in
with this and if we have to send
American boys down there to die then
that's fine we should do it but I mean
the problem is on both sides that the
sad thing is whether it's the extreme
right or the extreme left or the radical
right of the radical left or however you
wanted to find it so few people are
speaking with the facts and speaking
with any understanding it's too much of
it from the gut and from the heart and
too little discussion from the head ray
Bonner is an attorney graduate of
Stanford University Law School back in
1967 three and a half years the New York
Times is left there has written this
book published by The Times called
weakness and deceit US policy in El
Salvador and we want to thank him for
being with us and you all have a nice
weekend
[Music]
[Applause]